Document general gradle build guidelines (#76551)
elastic/elasticsearch: BUILDING.md

Building Elasticsearch with Gradle
=============================

Elasticsearch is built using the [Gradle](https://gradle.org/) open source build tools.

This document provides a general guidelines for using and working on the elasticsearch build logic.

## Build logic organisation

> The elasticsearch project contains 3 build related projects that are included into the elasticsearch build as a [composite build](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/composite_builds.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Elasticsearch project contains 3 build-related projects that are included into the Elasticsearch build as a [composite build](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/composite_builds.html).
```

Reviewer: In general I think it's good to capitalise "Elasticsearch" and "Elastic" in documents like this.

This project is published as part of the elasticsearch release and accessible by
`org.elasticsearch.gradle:build-tools:<versionNumber>`.
These build tools are also used by the `elasticsearch-hadoop` project maintained by elastic.

### `build-tools-internal`

This project contains all elasticsearch project specific build logic that is not meant to be shared
with other internal or external projects.

## Build guidelines

This is an intentionally small set of guidelines to build users and authors
to ensure we keep the build consistent. We also publish elasticsearch build logic
as `build-tools` to be usuable by thirdparty elasticsearch plugin authors. This is
also used by other elastic teams like `elasticsearch-hadoop`.
Breaking changes should therefore be avoided and an appropriate deprecation cycle
should be followed.

### Stay up to date

The elasticsearch build usually uses the latest Gradle GA release. We stay as close to the
latest Gradle releases as possible. In certain cases an update is blocked by a breaking behaviour
in Gradle. We're usually in contact with the gradle team here or working on a fix
in our build logic to resolve this.

> <b>The elasticsearch build fails the build if there's any deprecated gradle api used.</b>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The Elasticsearch build will fail if any deprecated Gradle API is used.**
```

### Make a change in the build

There are a few guidelines to follow that should make your life easier to make changes to the elasticsearch build.

> Please add a member of the `es-delivery` team as a reviewer if you're making non trivial changes build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please add a member of the `es-delivery` team as a reviewer if you're making non-trivial changes to the build.
```

#### Custom Plugin and Task implementations

Build logic that is used across multiple subprojects should considered to be moved into a Gradle plugin with according Gradle task implmentation.
Elasticsearch specific build logic is located in the `build-tools-internal` subproject including integration tests.

- Gradle plugins and Tasks should be written in Java
- We use a groovy and spock for setting up Gradle integration tests.
  (see https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/blob/master/build-tools/src/testFixtures/groovy/org/elasticsearch/gradle/fixtures/AbstractGradleFuncTest.groovy)

#### Declaring tasks

The elasticsearch build makes use of the [task avoidance API](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/task_configuration_avoidance.html) to keep the configuration time of the build low.

> - When declaring tasks (in build scripts or custom plugins) this means that we want to _register_ a task like:
> 
> 
>   a task should be declared via
> 
>   ```
>   tasks.register('someTask') {
>   }
>   ```
> 
>   instead of eagerly _creating_ the task
>   ```
>   task someTask {
>   }
>   ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When declaring tasks (in build scripts or custom plugins) this means that we want to _register_ a task like:

    tasks.register('someTask') { ... }

instead of eagerly _creating_ the task:

    task someTask { ... }
```
